README.md, before:

# Unraid Management Agent - Home Assistant Integration

[![hacs_badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/HACS-Custom-orange.svg)](https://github.com/custom-components/hacs)
[![GitHub Release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent.svg)](https://github.com/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent.svg)](../LICENSE)

Complete Home Assistant custom integration for monitoring and controlling Unraid servers via the Unraid Management Agent.

## Features

### 🔍 Comprehensive Monitoring

- **System Metrics**: CPU usage, RAM usage, CPU temperature, uptime
- **Array Status**: Array state, disk usage, parity check progress
- **GPU Metrics**: GPU utilization, temperature, power consumption (Intel/NVIDIA/AMD)
- **Network**: Interface status, bandwidth monitoring (RX/TX)
- **UPS**: Battery level, load, runtime estimation
- **Containers**: Docker container status and metrics
- **Virtual Machines**: VM status and resource allocation

### 🎮 Full Control

- **Docker Containers**: Start, stop, restart containers via switches
- **Virtual Machines**: Start, stop, restart VMs via switches
- **Array Management**: Start/stop array with buttons
- **Parity Checks**: Start/stop parity checks with buttons

### ⚡ Real-Time Updates

- **WebSocket Support**: Instant state updates (<1s latency)
- **Automatic Fallback**: Falls back to REST API polling if WebSocket fails
- **Exponential Backoff**: Smart reconnection strategy
- **No Data Loss**: Seamless transition between WebSocket and polling

### 🏠 Home Assistant Native

- **UI Configuration**: No YAML required for setup
- **Device Grouping**: All entities grouped under single device
- **Proper Device Classes**: Temperature, power, battery, duration, etc.
- **State Classes**: Support for statistics and long-term data
- **MDI Icons**: Beautiful Material Design Icons for all entities
- **Extra Attributes**: Contextual information for each entity

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

1. **Unraid Management Agent** installed and running on your Unraid server
2. **Home Assistant** 2025.1 or newer
3. **Network access** between Home Assistant and Unraid server

### Installation

**Quick Install via HACS:**

1. Add custom repository: `https://github.com/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent`
2. Install "Unraid Management Agent"
3. Restart Home Assistant
4. Add integration via UI

### Configuration

1. Go to **Settings** → **Devices & Services**
2. Click **+ Add Integration**
3. Search for "Unraid Management Agent"
4. Enter your Unraid server details:
   - Host: `192.168.1.100` (your Unraid IP)
   - Port: `8043` (default)
   - Update Interval: `30` seconds
   - Enable WebSocket: `true` (recommended)

## Entity Overview

### Sensors (13+ entities)

**System Sensors (4)**

- CPU Usage (%)
- RAM Usage (%)
- CPU Temperature (°C)
- Uptime (seconds)

**Array Sensors (2)**

- Array Usage (%)
- Parity Check Progress (%)

**GPU Sensors (4, conditional)**

- GPU Name
- GPU Utilization (%)
- GPU CPU Temperature (°C)
- GPU Power (W)

**UPS Sensors (3, conditional)**

- UPS Battery (%)
- UPS Load (%)
- UPS Runtime (seconds)

**Network Sensors (dynamic)**

- Network {interface} RX (bytes)
- Network {interface} TX (bytes)

### Binary Sensors (7+ entities)

**Array Binary Sensors (3)**

- Array Started (on/off)
- Parity Check Running (on/off)
- Parity Valid (problem indicator)

**UPS Binary Sensor (1, conditional)**

- UPS Connected (on/off)

**Container Binary Sensors (dynamic)**

- Container {name} (running/stopped)

**VM Binary Sensors (dynamic)**

- VM {name} (running/stopped)

**Network Binary Sensors (dynamic)**

- Network {interface} (up/down)

### Switches (dynamic)

- Container {name} - Start/stop Docker containers
- VM {name} - Start/stop virtual machines

### Buttons (4)

- Start Array
- Stop Array
- Start Parity Check
- Stop Parity Check

## Example Automations

### High CPU Alert

```yaml
automation:
  - alias: "Unraid High CPU Alert"
    trigger:
      - platform: numeric_state
        entity_id: sensor.unraid_cpu_usage
        above: 80
        for:
          minutes: 5
    action:
      - service: notify.mobile_app
        data:
          title: "⚠️ Unraid Alert"
          message: "CPU usage is {{ states('sensor.unraid_cpu_usage') }}%"
```

### UPS Graceful Shutdown

```yaml
automation:
  - alias: "Unraid UPS Critical Shutdown"
    trigger:
      - platform: numeric_state
        entity_id: sensor.unraid_ups_battery
        below: 10
    action:
      - service: switch.turn_off
        target:
          entity_id: all
        data:
          domain: switch
      - delay:
          seconds: 30
      - service: button.press
        target:
          entity_id: button.unraid_array_stop
```

## Architecture

### Components

- **API Client** (`api_client.py`) - REST API communication with aiohttp
- **WebSocket Client** (`websocket_client.py`) - Real-time event streaming
- **Data Coordinator** (`__init__.py`) - Data management and updates
- **Config Flow** (`config_flow.py`) - UI-based configuration
- **Platforms**:
  - `sensor.py` - System, array, GPU, UPS, network sensors
  - `binary_sensor.py` - Status indicators
  - `switch.py` - Container and VM control
  - `button.py` - Array and parity check control

### Data Flow

```bash
Unraid Server (REST API + WebSocket)
           ↓
    API Client / WebSocket Client
           ↓
    Data Update Coordinator
           ↓
    Entity Platforms (Sensor, Binary Sensor, Switch, Button)
           ↓
    Home Assistant UI
```

### Update Strategy

1. **Initial Load**: REST API fetches all data on startup
2. **Real-Time Updates**: WebSocket receives events and updates coordinator
3. **Fallback Polling**: REST API polls at configured interval if WebSocket fails
4. **Control Actions**: REST API sends commands, coordinator refreshes immediately

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Cannot Connect**

- Verify Unraid Management Agent is running: `curl http://<ip>:8043/api/v1/health`
- Check firewall rules allow port 8043
- Ensure Home Assistant can reach Unraid server

**WebSocket Not Working**

- Check logs for WebSocket errors
- Verify no proxy blocking WebSocket
- Integration will fall back to REST polling automatically

**Entities Not Updating**

- Check update interval in options
- Verify WebSocket connection in logs
- Test REST API manually

**Missing Entities**

- Verify resources exist on Unraid (containers, VMs, GPU, UPS)
- Reload integration
- Check logs for entity creation errors

## Development

### Project Structure

```bash
ha-unraid-management-agent/
├── custom_components/
│   └── unraid_management_agent/
│       ├── __init__.py           # Integration setup
│       ├── api_client.py         # REST API client
│       ├── binary_sensor.py      # Binary sensor platform
│       ├── button.py             # Button platform
│       ├── config_flow.py        # Configuration flow
│       ├── const.py              # Constants
│       ├── manifest.json         # Integration metadata
│       ├── sensor.py             # Sensor platform
│       ├── strings.json          # Translations
│       ├── switch.py             # Switch platform
│       └── websocket_client.py   # WebSocket client
└── README.md                     # This file
```

### Testing

1. Install in development mode
2. Enable debug logging:

   ```yaml
   logger:
     default: info
     logs:
       custom_components.unraid_management_agent: debug
   ```

3. Check logs for errors
4. Test all entity types
5. Test control operations
6. Test WebSocket reconnection

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](../LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Release v2025.11.1 - Fix switch synchronization and add release automation
This release includes the following changes:

- Fixed container/VM switch state synchronization issue where switches would jump back to previous state after toggling
- Implemented optimistic state handling for switches to provide immediate UI feedback
- Added automated GitHub release workflow for streamlined version releases
- Added comprehensive release process documentation
- Added CHANGELOG.md for tracking version history
- Updated README.md with releases section and contributing guidelines

README.md, after:

# Unraid Management Agent - Home Assistant Integration

[![hacs_badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/HACS-Custom-orange.svg)](https://github.com/custom-components/hacs)
[![GitHub Release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent.svg)](https://github.com/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent/releases)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent.svg)](../LICENSE)

Complete Home Assistant custom integration for monitoring and controlling Unraid servers via the Unraid Management Agent.

## Features

### 🔍 Comprehensive Monitoring

- **System Metrics**: CPU usage, RAM usage, CPU temperature, uptime
- **Array Status**: Array state, disk usage, parity check progress
- **GPU Metrics**: GPU utilization, temperature, power consumption (Intel/NVIDIA/AMD)
- **Network**: Interface status, bandwidth monitoring (RX/TX)
- **UPS**: Battery level, load, runtime estimation
- **Containers**: Docker container status and metrics
- **Virtual Machines**: VM status and resource allocation

### 🎮 Full Control

- **Docker Containers**: Start, stop, restart containers via switches
- **Virtual Machines**: Start, stop, restart VMs via switches
- **Array Management**: Start/stop array with buttons
- **Parity Checks**: Start/stop parity checks with buttons

### ⚡ Real-Time Updates

- **WebSocket Support**: Instant state updates (<1s latency)
- **Automatic Fallback**: Falls back to REST API polling if WebSocket fails
- **Exponential Backoff**: Smart reconnection strategy
- **No Data Loss**: Seamless transition between WebSocket and polling

### 🏠 Home Assistant Native

- **UI Configuration**: No YAML required for setup
- **Device Grouping**: All entities grouped under single device
- **Proper Device Classes**: Temperature, power, battery, duration, etc.
- **State Classes**: Support for statistics and long-term data
- **MDI Icons**: Beautiful Material Design Icons for all entities
- **Extra Attributes**: Contextual information for each entity

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

1. **Unraid Management Agent** installed and running on your Unraid server
2. **Home Assistant** 2025.1 or newer
3. **Network access** between Home Assistant and Unraid server

### Installation

**Quick Install via HACS:**

1. Add custom repository: `https://github.com/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent`
2. Install "Unraid Management Agent"
3. Restart Home Assistant
4. Add integration via UI

### Configuration

1. Go to **Settings** → **Devices & Services**
2. Click **+ Add Integration**
3. Search for "Unraid Management Agent"
4. Enter your Unraid server details:
   - Host: `192.168.1.100` (your Unraid IP)
   - Port: `8043` (default)
   - Update Interval: `30` seconds
   - Enable WebSocket: `true` (recommended)

## Entity Overview

### Sensors (13+ entities)

**System Sensors (4)**

- CPU Usage (%)
- RAM Usage (%)
- CPU Temperature (°C)
- Uptime (seconds)

**Array Sensors (2)**

- Array Usage (%)
- Parity Check Progress (%)

**GPU Sensors (4, conditional)**

- GPU Name
- GPU Utilization (%)
- GPU CPU Temperature (°C)
- GPU Power (W)

**UPS Sensors (3, conditional)**

- UPS Battery (%)
- UPS Load (%)
- UPS Runtime (seconds)

**Network Sensors (dynamic)**

- Network {interface} RX (bytes)
- Network {interface} TX (bytes)

### Binary Sensors (7+ entities)

**Array Binary Sensors (3)**

- Array Started (on/off)
- Parity Check Running (on/off)
- Parity Valid (problem indicator)

**UPS Binary Sensor (1, conditional)**

- UPS Connected (on/off)

**Container Binary Sensors (dynamic)**

- Container {name} (running/stopped)

**VM Binary Sensors (dynamic)**

- VM {name} (running/stopped)

**Network Binary Sensors (dynamic)**

- Network {interface} (up/down)

### Switches (dynamic)

- Container {name} - Start/stop Docker containers
- VM {name} - Start/stop virtual machines

### Buttons (4)

- Start Array
- Stop Array
- Start Parity Check
- Stop Parity Check

## Example Automations

### High CPU Alert

```yaml
automation:
  - alias: "Unraid High CPU Alert"
    trigger:
      - platform: numeric_state
        entity_id: sensor.unraid_cpu_usage
        above: 80
        for:
          minutes: 5
    action:
      - service: notify.mobile_app
        data:
          title: "⚠️ Unraid Alert"
          message: "CPU usage is {{ states('sensor.unraid_cpu_usage') }}%"
```

### UPS Graceful Shutdown

```yaml
automation:
  - alias: "Unraid UPS Critical Shutdown"
    trigger:
      - platform: numeric_state
        entity_id: sensor.unraid_ups_battery
        below: 10
    action:
      - service: switch.turn_off
        target:
          entity_id: all
        data:
          domain: switch
      - delay:
          seconds: 30
      - service: button.press
        target:
          entity_id: button.unraid_array_stop
```

## Architecture

### Components

- **API Client** (`api_client.py`) - REST API communication with aiohttp
- **WebSocket Client** (`websocket_client.py`) - Real-time event streaming
- **Data Coordinator** (`__init__.py`) - Data management and updates
- **Config Flow** (`config_flow.py`) - UI-based configuration
- **Platforms**:
  - `sensor.py` - System, array, GPU, UPS, network sensors
  - `binary_sensor.py` - Status indicators
  - `switch.py` - Container and VM control
  - `button.py` - Array and parity check control

### Data Flow

```bash
Unraid Server (REST API + WebSocket)
           ↓
    API Client / WebSocket Client
           ↓
    Data Update Coordinator
           ↓
    Entity Platforms (Sensor, Binary Sensor, Switch, Button)
           ↓
    Home Assistant UI
```

### Update Strategy

1. **Initial Load**: REST API fetches all data on startup
2. **Real-Time Updates**: WebSocket receives events and updates coordinator
3. **Fallback Polling**: REST API polls at configured interval if WebSocket fails
4. **Control Actions**: REST API sends commands, coordinator refreshes immediately

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Cannot Connect**

- Verify Unraid Management Agent is running: `curl http://<ip>:8043/api/v1/health`
- Check firewall rules allow port 8043
- Ensure Home Assistant can reach Unraid server

**WebSocket Not Working**

- Check logs for WebSocket errors
- Verify no proxy blocking WebSocket
- Integration will fall back to REST polling automatically

**Entities Not Updating**

- Check update interval in options
- Verify WebSocket connection in logs
- Test REST API manually

**Missing Entities**

- Verify resources exist on Unraid (containers, VMs, GPU, UPS)
- Reload integration
- Check logs for entity creation errors

## Development

### Project Structure

```bash
ha-unraid-management-agent/
├── custom_components/
│   └── unraid_management_agent/
│       ├── __init__.py           # Integration setup
│       ├── api_client.py         # REST API client
│       ├── binary_sensor.py      # Binary sensor platform
│       ├── button.py             # Button platform
│       ├── config_flow.py        # Configuration flow
│       ├── const.py              # Constants
│       ├── manifest.json         # Integration metadata
│       ├── sensor.py             # Sensor platform
│       ├── strings.json          # Translations
│       ├── switch.py             # Switch platform
│       └── websocket_client.py   # WebSocket client
└── README.md                     # This file
```

### Testing

1. Install in development mode
2. Enable debug logging:

   ```yaml
   logger:
     default: info
     logs:
       custom_components.unraid_management_agent: debug
   ```

3. Check logs for errors
4. Test all entity types
5. Test control operations
6. Test WebSocket reconnection

## Releases

This integration follows semantic versioning with the format `vYYYY.MM.x` (e.g., `v2025.11.1`).

### Latest Release

Check the [Releases](https://github.com/ruaan-deysel/ha-unraid-management-agent/releases) page for the latest version and changelog.

### Release Process

Releases are automated via GitHub Actions:

1. Update `manifest.json` version
2. Update `CHANGELOG.md` with release notes
3. Create and push a version tag (e.g., `v2025.11.1`)
4. GitHub Actions automatically builds and publishes the release

For detailed release process documentation, see [docs/RELEASE_PROCESS.md](docs/RELEASE_PROCESS.md).

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Test thoroughly
5. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](../LICENSE) file for details.
